source/foss.md, before:

# What is Open-Source?

- Open source software refers to free software. Gratis vs. Libre!

	- That being said, some open source software costs money. The word free is not used in the sense of without cost, but rather, as in little or no restriction.

	- As cheeky example, OpenOffice is owned by the commercial company Sun, and a lot of the philosophies behind the software are not free. Many developers who worked on OpenOffice branched the code and started LibreOffice which follows the freedom philosophy. 

- Open-source software is more than just making the source code public.
	
	- For example, the GNU Operating System's philosophy guidelines provide 4 basic freedoms that make a software "Free open source software".

		1. Freedom to run for any purpose.

		2. Freedom to study source code and change.

		3. Freedom to redistribute copies.

		4. Freedom to redistribute modified copies.

------------------------------------

# Open-Source Means Freedom.

- There are several sub-categories of open software including, but not limited to: open-source, FOSS, FLOSS, and Libre.

- Effectively, these come down to the reason for making your software open, and the philosophies around their availability and rights.

- To the user and the developer, the end-result is quite similar.

------------------------------------

# Proprietary Software

- Proprietary (nonfree) software is defined as software lacking in one or more of the mentioned liberties.

1. Only to run for certain purposes. 

	- Time-based licensing.

2. Hidden or obfuscated source code. 

	- Google's Javascript.

3. DRM and other methods to disallow redistribution of the product.

4. Not allowed to redistribute modified copies.

	- Even if all other essentials are met, without this freedom, the software is not open-source.

------------------------------------

# Proprietary Software Is Tempting

- Businesses do not want to share trade secrets.

	- People who make algorithms for stock market trading, using quantitative analysis, never share their code or methods.

- Closed-source reduces competition by not giving other companies ideas.

	- It's easy to look at code and find ways to improve it. It is not easy to reverse-engineer a program to figure out how a button works.

- Businesses want to make money and it is easier to monetize and retain market share with proprietary software.

- In some cases, proprietary software better choice.

	- Sensitive applications, such as the ObamaCare website, Citizenship and Immigration Canada, and security applications, are not meant to be open-source. These things are best left a mystery to prevent hacking.

------------------------------------

# Proprietary Issues

- Maintaining the correct licenses for proprietary software is difficult.

	- You may have to defend your licenses and patents in court, inducing heavy fees.

	- Pirating is rampant and companies often waste valuable resources trying to lock down their software instead of improving.

		- When EA Games released SimCity last year, its heavy DRM requiring sign-in and a persistent Internet connection made playing the game nearly impossible. It cost EA money to bring up new servers, rush patches, and severely damaged their reputation. Amazon pulled the game from its shelves temporarily.

- Proprietary software, proprietary support.

	- When a company stops supporting software, all support for it ceases as well. If a popular project is discontinued, without the source-code it cannot be revived by a third-party.

- Contribution to the project is scarce.

	- If a user notices a bug, he or she must report to the company, and hope that it gets fixed at some point. This can completely damage someone's work flow.

	- With only few developers, proprietary software is prone to old, outdated, and undocumented code as there is no open review system, as well as no incentive to modernize.

----------------------------------

# Open-Source to the Rescue!

- Open-source software is publicly viewable.

	- Anyone can notice a bug, see how to fix it, implement on their side, and then contribute the change to the project.

	- The source-code is completely open so users can notice malicious activity, unlike in proprietary software.

- Support for the software lives as long as the interest in the software remains.

	- As long as there are users of the software who are intelligent enough to know the code, support for the software will exist.

	- If the project dies, and the source code is available, the project can be overtaken by a third-party.

- Licensing is easy.

	- Without worrying about distributing the software and keeping track of what the users are doing with the software, you have more focus on what you need to get done, keeping customers happy.

- As developers, you have something to show for.

	- Working in proprietary software means that your ideas are owned by your company. Open-source software is useful for developers as it shows their abilities in the most concrete way possible. GitHub is practically an on-line resume these days.

----------------------------------

# Open-Course, Open Problems.

- Open-source software is easy to trust.

	- We assume that, because software is open and the source code is visible, we expect that if the software were malicious that it would not be distributed.

		- This is false.

	- With open-source software, we tend to assume that the developers aren't trying to gain anything. This is very far from the truth. Google did not create Android so that phones were more stable. They did it for user behavior data and consequently ad revenue.

- Confusing to the user.

	- Do you know that Android is a fork of Linux? Do you know the difference between Cinnamon and Gnome (FORK)? LibreOffice is a fork of OpenOffice, with a merge of Go-oo. Most Linux operating systems (of which there are 1000s) are forks of Debian, including Ubuntu, Mint, and more. MariaDB is a fork of MySQL. What to use, what are the differences, which is better? There is no easy answer, so this is intimidating and confusing for the user.

- No guaranteed support.

	- A classic example is that businesses trust Microsoft Word for their office needs. When issues arise, support is prompt. Conversely, LibreOffice's support is not guaranteed and problems can be unpredictable. This is especially true for software that doesn't require payment, as then developers may not have incentive to help users.

- Developer drama.

	- The developer community, when open, is subject to drama. Whereas proprietary software has a clear goal and developers have an incentive to work together (money). Open-source is not restricted in any way, so conflicts will arise.

		- When CyanogenMod, an open-source fork of Android, announced that it were to become a proprietary company, many of its prime developers left the project and started a new fork of Android called OmniRom.

		- Linux users are known for their opinions and arguments. Some Linux developers are worse.

-----------------------

# Open-Source Software - Good or Bad?

- Open-source software is undoubtedly a good thing, but sometimes closed-source is the right choice for a company or developer.

- Software can change between open-source and closed-source. 

	- Closed-source projects are often re-released as open-source when they are being decommissioned.

Commit message:

Correct typos, add information, fringe cases

source/foss.md, after:

# What is Open-Source?

- Open source software refers to free software. Gratis vs. Libre!

	- That being said, some open source software costs money. The word free is not used in the sense of without cost, but rather, as in little or no restriction.

	- As cheeky example, OpenOffice is owned by the commercial company Sun, and a lot of the philosophies behind the software are not free. Many developers who worked on OpenOffice branched the code and started LibreOffice which follows the freedom philosophy. 

- Open-source software is more than just making the source code public.
	
- The GNU Operating System's philosophy guidelines provide 4 basic freedoms that make a software "Free open source software".

1. Freedom to run for any purpose.

2. Freedom to study source code and change.

3. Freedom to redistribute copies.

4. Freedom to redistribute modified copies.

------------------------------------

# Open-Source Means Freedom.

- There are several sub-categories of open software including, but not limited to: open-source, FOSS, FLOSS, and Libre.

	- Effectively, these come down to the reason for making your software open, and the philosophies around their availability and rights.

- To the user and the developer, the end-result is quite similar.

------------------------------------

# Proprietary Software

- Proprietary (nonfree) software is defined as software lacking in one or more of the mentioned liberties.

1. Only to run for certain purposes. 

	- Time-based licensing.

2. Hidden or obfuscated source code. 

	- Google's Javascript.

3. DRM and other methods to disallow redistribution of the product.

4. Not allowed to redistribute modified copies. (GNU)

	- Even if all other essentials are met, without this freedom, the software is not open-source.

------------------------------------

# Proprietary Software Is Tempting

- Businesses do not want to share trade secrets.

	- People who make algorithms for stock market trading, using quantitative analysis, never share their code or methods.

- Closed-source reduces competition by not giving other companies ideas.

	- It's easy to look at code and find ways to improve it. It is not easy to reverse-engineer a program to figure out how a button works.

- Businesses want to make money and it is easier to monetize and retain market share with proprietary software.

- In some cases, proprietary software better choice.

	- Sensitive applications, such as the ObamaCare website, Citizenship and Immigration Canada, and security applications, are not meant to be open-source. These things are best left a mystery to prevent hacking.

------------------------------------

# Proprietary Issues

- Maintaining the correct licenses for proprietary software is difficult.

	- You may have to defend your licenses and patents in court, inducing heavy fees.

	- Pirating is rampant and companies often waste valuable resources trying to lock down their software instead of improving.

		- When EA Games released SimCity last year, its heavy DRM requiring sign-in and a persistent Internet connection made playing the game nearly impossible. It cost EA money to bring up new servers, rush patches, and severely damaged their reputation. Amazon pulled the game from its shelves temporarily.

- Proprietary software, proprietary support.

	- When a company stops supporting software, all support for it ceases as well. If a popular project is discontinued, without the source-code it cannot be revived by a third-party.

- Contribution to the project is scarce.

	- If a user notices a bug, he or she must report to the company, and hope that it gets fixed at some point. This can completely damage someone's work flow.

	- With only few developers, proprietary software is prone to old, outdated, and undocumented code as there is no open review system, as well as no incentive to modernize.

----------------------------------

# Open-Source to the Rescue!

- Open-source software is publicly viewable.

	- Anyone can notice a bug, see how to fix it, implement on their side, and then contribute the change to the project.

	- The source-code is completely open so users can notice malicious activity, unlike in proprietary software.

- Support for the software lives as long as the interest in the software remains.

	- As long as there are users of the software who are intelligent enough to know the code, support for the software will exist.

	- If the project dies, and the source code is available, the project can be overtaken by a third-party.

- Licensing is easy.

	- Without worrying about distributing the software and keeping track of what the users are doing with the software, you have more focus on what you need to get done, keeping customers happy.

- As developers, you have something to show for.

	- Working in proprietary software means that your ideas are owned by your company. Open-source software is useful for developers as it shows their abilities in the most concrete way possible. GitHub is practically an on-line resume these days.

----------------------------------

# Open-Source, Open Problems.

- Open-source software is easy to trust.

	- We assume that, because software is open and the source code is visible, we expect that if the software were malicious that it would not be distributed.

		- This is false.

	- With open-source software, we tend to assume that the developers aren't trying to gain anything. This is very far from the truth. Google did not create Android so that phones were more stable. They did it for user behavior data and consequently ad revenue.

- Confusing to the user.

	- Do you know that Android is a fork of Linux? Do you know the difference between Cinnamon and Gnome (FORK)? LibreOffice is a fork of OpenOffice, with a merge of Go-oo. Most Linux operating systems (of which there are 1000s) are forks of Debian, including Ubuntu, Mint, and more. MariaDB is a fork of MySQL. What to use, what are the differences, which is better? There is no easy answer, so this is intimidating and confusing for the user.

- No guaranteed support.

	- A classic example is that businesses trust Microsoft Word for their office needs. When issues arise, support is prompt. Conversely, LibreOffice's support is not guaranteed and problems can be unpredictable. This is especially true for software that doesn't require payment, as then developers may not have incentive to help users.

- Developer drama.

	- The developer community, when open, is subject to drama. Whereas proprietary software has a clear goal and developers have an incentive to work together (money). Open-source is not restricted in any way, so conflicts will arise.

		- When CyanogenMod, an open-source fork of Android, announced that it were to become a proprietary company, many of its prime developers left the project and started a new fork of Android called OmniRom.

		- Linux users are known for their opinions and arguments. Some Linux developers are worse.

-----------------------

# Open-Source Software - Good or Bad?

- Open-source software is undoubtedly a good thing, but sometimes closed-source is the right choice for a company or developer.

- Software can change between open-source and closed-source. 

	- Closed-source projects are often re-released as open-source when they are being decommissioned.

----------------------

# Fringe Cases

- You can be open-source while still making money:

- MySQL is open source but there are proprietary licenses available for certain commercial applications. Dual-licensing.

- Git is open source software, but GitHub sells a service for hosting and managing with tight integration with the service. Selling the service.

- Ubuntu has ads built-in to gain money. Don't use Ubuntu. Subsidizing with ads.

- You can have publicly available source-code while still being proprietary:

- Nvidia has good support for Linux with its open source graphics card drivers, but the source code is obfuscated to prevent reverse-engineering of their hardware functionality. Code obfuscation (not really open)

- You can change the license:

- Some software will become open-source at its end-of-life stage after being closed, for example, Netscape Communicator (Netscape 4.x) and StarOffice (Sun Microsystems)
